bparke5@lsu.edu
Brian Parker
12 Chapters

Chapter 1 -Intro
Keys - unique identifier(usually id)
Referential integrity
T-sql is a representation of the standard
History
DML - Data manipulation lang
    select, insert, update, delete
DDL - data definition lang.
    create, alter, drop

Views save execution plan to aid in performance

Chapter 2 -SSMS
TCP/IP must be enabled to connect to server
At least Windows auth is required, SQL server auth can be added
Attaching existing db. Attach .mdf database file
retore -> backup database, usually .bak
Log file is .ldf
db can be detached, move .mdf, and attach elsewhere

Restores will be done as version at time of db creation, can be updated in options

Recovery model -
Full keeps transaction log, simple does not
Setting to full and not backing up can cause transaction history to get very large
Use database diagrams to view table relationship diagrams
page 65 for 1-1, 1-many, many-many
Default select quantity can be changed in options
If editing, locks are placed on data being shown

Batch terminator - ie: GO
Use query designer to build selects
msdn will have documentation on all versions of SQL server
NOTE: Check out temporal tables
concat, lag, lead, choose functions

Chapter 3
Order statements execute
FROM - figures out tables used, joins, indexing
WHERE - looks for filters/exclusion conditions
GROUP BY
HAVING
SELECT - minimize data size
ORDER BY - orders

Order by is performance heavy
Can be optimized by doing ordering on client(ie: report server)

In documentation, underlines values are default, brackets are optional

SELECT
*
comma separated list
can calculate items in select list
IE SELECT itemsA + itemsB as results FROM ...
With Ties

WHERE
between: for dates or numbers. Inclusive

when renaming, use brackets or quotes to add spaces
renaming can be done with equals syntax, where alias comes first

pg. 95 Strings
data can be concatenated
concat function will convert NULL to "" automagically

SELECT CONCAT(column1, column2) AS CombinedList;

Standard order of precedence, use parentheses 
functions
LEFT(column, n of spaces to capture)
GetDate, DateDiff
convert takes a third parameter to set preferred format.

Distinct
TOP: Select top 5 percent
With ties: will include order by matches that occur on 
    the last row of the result set.

WHERE
    All conditions result in bool or null value. Condition must be true to be included.
IS NULL
AND, OR, IS NOT NULL, NOT

AND should not be short circuited, CASE and IIF are short-circuited.
IN clauses are short-circuited.
invoice total - payment total - credit total = balance due.

IN
Used with WHERE to pass in array of matches

Best to list in list in same order as indexed row order.
If search is slow, good candidate for index.

NOT IN is one of the least efficient conditions.
    Must run on all values, and does so on every row.

BETWEEN

[NOT] LIKE 
    "%abcdefg%"
    "abc[de]fg" or
    "abc[d-f]g" within range
    "abc[^d-f]g" not within range
    "abc[d-f]%" or

You can deploy C# functions to SQL Server

IS NULL, IS NOT NULL, or ISNULL(column, defaultValue)

ORDER BY
    ASC is default, or DESC
    You can order by columns outside of select(unless using group by)
    You can order by an alias
    NULL goes to top if ASC

    You can order by expression
OFFSET FETCH
More flexible select top
used to modify order by results
ie:
    Select...
    Order by name DESC
    OFFSET 0 ROWS
    FETCH FIRST 5 ROWS ONLY
Useful for paging when combined with stored procedures.

Add USE to set context of current database.
You can turn on Estimated Execution Plan to see times for queries.

Chapter 4 Joins AKA two or more table
Check out murach.com to get course material. 2012 version will have CLR exercises.
Inner, outer, self, cross
You can have additional operators as part of join condition.
Best practice is to use table name with column name.
Temporary table name aliases are called correlation names.

Object names can be fully qualified(including server name)
linked_server.database.schema.object
schema = usually dbo
object = table name
Some limitations are put on selecting XML from linked server.
self-join = joining table on itself
Example is finding vendors that are in the same city as one another.
Multiple joins create interim tables

Can be select * from table1, table2, etc where all conditions
Bad idea. Cross joins, big interim table.

LEFT, RIGHT, FULL OUTER JOIN
NULL is returned for all values returned with no match.
Useful for finding null values.

Multiple joins will run join on interim table.
Most of the checks can be avoided by using foreign keys, otherwise used for finding entities with no matches.

Be careful mixing inner and outer joins. More reliable to use inner, then outer.

CROSS JOIN
Cartesian Product of two tables.
Useful for testing or some SQL fanciness.

UNION
Takes results of multiple selects and creates final table.
Each select must return same number of columns.
Each column must have a compatible data type.
No order by clause in the select statements.
Column names come from the first select statement.

Nifty: 
SELECT 'value' as column name, ...

Better to use CASE, WHEN for multiple UNION

EXCEPT
Only keep rows where data points do not match. Looking for different.
Select ... from ...
EXCEPT Select ... from ...

INTERSECT
Only keep rows where all data points match between results. Looking for duplicates.
Select ... from ...
INTERSECT Select ... from ...

Chapter 5
Summary queries
Aggregate functions
AVG
MIN
MAX
COUNT or COUNT(*)
COUNT(*) is number of rows(preferred)

If column supports null values, count(columnThatSupportsNulls) excludes count for columns with null
    values.

GROUP BY
SELECT ..
FROM ...
WHERE ...
GROUP BY groupByList
HAVING  searchCondition
ORDER BY ...

group by filters data before grouping,
having groups after grouping

ie: SELECT Id, AVG(total) as TheTotal
    FROM ...
    GROUP BY Id
    HAVING (AVG(total) > 2000)
    ORDER BY TheTotal DESC;

